estatistica 4th August 
select small data set (big data set is better [big enough]) maioria dos estudantes usa algo por vbolta de 503.
1- Calculate Mean range SD CV
2- Perform ONE-WAY anova, ANOVA results and report
3- 2 variables for regression analysis / linear regression analysis/ hypothesis testing/ report
4- basic process capability analysis / simple spc chart (X-bar chart) / report
5- record oral presentation (+- 20 minutes, but is free of time)

AULA 1
Why statistics?
*summarize numerical information efficient
*inferential statistics ? too many people ?
*data is impoortant to validate and evidence conclusion
*3 steps:
1- data organization
2- summarization and categorization
3- data analisys (DONT SIMPLY SHOW DATA, TELL THE RESEARCH STORY WITH YOUR DATA)
*constant (pi number) x variables (heigth)
*datatypes 
categorical{qualitative} [(ordinal there is a order like 5 stars,4 stars), (nominal is like labels, apple banana), (binary is 2 possibilities, man x woman)] pie chart // pareto chart // bar chart
numerical{quantitative} [(discrete is count number of fruits) and (continuous is measured size of population)] - Boxplot // Histogram
IT IS NECESSARY TO EXPLAIN EACH OF THAT IN THE PROJECT
*Measures of centre Mean - average, or the sum of numbers divided by the number of numbers / mode (most common value ) / median (middle number when the number are arranged se for numero par eh a media os dois valores do meio)
VALE A PENA CITAR TODOS ESSES VALORES NO PROJETO MESMO SEM PRECISAR 
*frequency table / group frequency table
*outlier afeta mais a media do que median e mode
*quartiles (q1 25% of the values are less than or equal to)(q2 sample median 50% of the values are less than or equal to) (q3 75%) 
Interquartile range it measures the spread (just like sd and range// TALVEZ DE PRA MENCIONAR NO TRABALHO) : IQR Q3-Q1 I
*Measures od dispersion: Range (difference between largest and smallest); SD (average difference or typical error); CV (percentage of the mean); ADICIONAR VARIANCE NO TRABALHO
*Bell curves represents normal distribution SERIA BOM INCLUIR NO TRABALHO
*Skewed data (quando bell curve nao aparece perfeito)/ positive and negative skew NO PROJETO EXPLICAR PQ ESTA POSITIVE OU NEGATIVE SKEW
*CV EH BOM PRA COMPARAR WHOLE MILK X SKIN, JA O SD EH BOM NUMA COMPARACAO GLOBAL
*USAR EXAMPLE DESCRIPTION PARA EXPLICAR SEUS DADOS
*boxplot IQR + Q1 + Q2 + Q3 + maximum + minimum + outlier + upper/lower whisker / NAO ESQUECER DE TER LABELS, pelo menos n=20
*COPIAR BOXPLOT COMPONENTS EXPLAINED NO TRABALHO
*COLOCAR SCATERPLOT 
*visualizing 2 variables:
Y numerical x numerical : SCATERPLOT (mostrar ano por valor)
Y numerical x categorical : BOXPLOT (mostrar calor por categoria)
Y categorical x numerical: BOXPLOT WITH GROUPS (TRANSPOSED)
Y categorical x categorical: STACKED BAR CHART OR CROSS TABULATION

IDEIA APRESENTACAO TRABALHO : https://www.bordbia.ie/globalassets/bordbia.ie/industry/performance-and-prospects/bord-bia-exports-performance-and-prospects-report-2023---2024.pdf

AULA 2
CORRELATION AND REGRESSION 
Both are basd on multivariate distribution (distribution of multiple variables)
Correlation - association or absence of the relationship between 2 variables
correlation coeficient (r) vai de -1 a +1
when one variable incrases as the other increases - correlation positive
when one decreases as the other increases - correlation negative
absecence of correlation = 0
 Scaterplot pode ser usado pra mostrar Correlation
 coeficient of correlation (r ao quadrado) is the proportion of the variation in Y whick is explained by the variation in X, valor dado em percentual (Y = a + bX)
 1 - (r ao quadrado) mostrara uma porcentagem de variacao que nao eh explicada

Regression - predicts the value of dependent variable based on the know of the independent variable
RESPONSE AND PREDICTOR
what is the response for example is the exam score
what is the predictor for example is the revision time
in that case as much as you have revision time, higher will be your exam score
the idea to define it is what question you want to answer, for example:
quanto mais passa o tempo, mais bebemos leite, nesse caso seria 
in that case as much as you pass years, higher will be your milk ingestion
so response would be value of milk
predictor would be years

Fit regression model results
regression equation:
(Y = a + bX)
exam score = 42.78 + 0.57 revision time
isso significa que, se uma pessoa estudar zero horas ela tiraria 42.78
se ela estudar 1 unidade de revision time ela tiraria 42.78 + 0.57
se ela estudar 4 unidade de revision time ela tiraria 42.78 + 0.57 x 4

No nosso exemplo do whole milk
VALUE = 11341 - 5.465 years
Ssupondo o ano de 2000
Value = 11341 - 5.465 x 2000 
value =410 o que eh proximo do valor real 423
for every one unit increase in year, the predicted value decreases by 5.465 units. The constant term (11341) represents the predicted value when the year is zero (unrealistic in real life scenario, but logically in math terms based in our data, if data was bigger, we could have a more reliable result, as our data is small, that brings more possibilities of error)

P-value goes from 0 to 1: a small p-value (<0.05) suggests that the coeficient is statistically significant
in our scenario the P-value for Year is 0.000, so we can concludes that years has a statistically positive effect on value (nao sei se fala positivo por ser + no sinal ou se eh pq eh proximo a 0)

R-sq (r ao quadrado) represents the proportion of the variance in the vVALUE that is explained by the regression model
in our scenario R-sq is 81.54%, which means that the model explains 81.54% of the variability in exam scores

R-sq(adj) (r ao quadrado adjusted) is a more acurate measure of the model's fit when there are multiple terms in the model. it penalizes the model for having more terms
the adjuste R-sq in our scenario is 80.93% ( in our scenario as we are using only one predictor (Year), that doesnt change much, would change if we include more predictors) por isso os valores sao parecidos do adjuste e do nao

R-sq(pred) is an estimate of how well the model would fit a new data set, in our case it is 79.15%

graficos (nao precisa usar todos, usa os que forem importantes)
-Normal Probability plot this plot compares the residual to a normal distribution, if the residuals are normaly distributed the points will fall close to the line.
In our scenario residuals may not be perfectly normal, but they are not severely deviating from normally either

- Histogram shows distribution of residuals the shape of histogram also used to assess normality (expected the bell shape)
in our case the histogram appears roughly symmetrical skewed to the rigth (positive) which is consistent with normality

- Versus fit:shows the residuals plotter against the fitted values
if there is no pattern, it suggests the residuals are random scattered and no relationship between residuals and fitted value
when there is no pattern is a good sign
in our case we have a pattern (o que significa?)

- Versus order: displays the residuals on the y axis and the order in which data were collected on the x-axis
purpose is to identify any patterns in the residual that might indicate a violation of the assumption independence of errors
in our case (o que significa?)

multiple regression (no caso do projeto nao sera necessario, pois nao temos + de 2 variaveis)


AULA 3
The purpose of an experiment is to discover information - This information may provide insight leading to action that will improve a process
A large number of variables can potentially effect the performance of the system. Controllable and uncontrollable (noise factors)
Objective of an experiment: which variables are most influential, small noise
Design of experiment (DOE) and statistical process control (SPC) are very closed interrelated

DOE is an active statistical method, SPC is a passive statistical method

SPC: watch the process and wait for info to lead to change

DOE: perform tests on the process, making changes in the inputs and observing changes in the output.

PODE USAR ESSES TERMOS NO TRABALHO
Independent variables are variables that are manipulated or are changed by researchers and whose effects are measured and compared (can also be called factor)
The dependent variables refer to that type of variable that measures the affect of the independent variable(s) on the test units.  (response variable)

If we wants to estimate milk consumption, then the factors such as type of milk and year are independent variables, while the  milk consumption is highly dependent on such factors. Therefore, they are designated as the  dependent variable or respnse variable.

Factors are the variables that experimenters control during an experiment in order to determine their effect on the response variable, only use a limited number of values

It is important to see factors when they are numerical should be a limited number of numerical values, in our scenario we migth use different ranges to observe it better, instead of taking all years, one by one, lets assume decades, for example, more numbers lead ro more errors

DOE CONCEPTS
1- formulate your question properly, what you want to achieve in your project?
* how is the consumption over the decades of milk / whole / skimmed
*does the consumption of milk of aspecific type yes affected by the decades

2- you want to compare it with some scenario, some real life example, for example eyou could compare it with the increase of vegan people in the decades, (precisaria achar algum dado para ver isso)ou vai tentar comparar apenas leite contra leite?
VOCE TAMBEM PODE CRIAR SEUS PROPRIOS DADOS SOBRE VEGANOS POR EXEMPLO E EXPLICAR PARA ELA, ITS FINE TO DO IF YOU MENTION IT, AS THAT IS THE LIMITATION OF YOUR DATA AND I NEEDED TO MAKE UP THE DATA

3 - you should be able to replicate your experiment to avoid erros BIAS , nessa parte explicaria porque usou a decada como um todo ao inves de usar apenas um ano escolhido de forma randomica, that reduces the effect of uncontrolled variation, in other words increase the precision, avoid problems with outliers
error variance
learning effect (da pra tentar dizer algo do tipo, a pessoa depois que aprende a consumir o leite skimmed, e sabendo como utiliza-lo melhor no dia dia diminui o learning effect, pois ela aprende que pra receita dela do dia dia e pro consumo dela ser tao prazeroso quanto o normal ela precisa fazer pequenos ajustes ate chegar na expectativa dela)


4 -randomization, eh mais focado em experimentos quando a pessoa nao sabe se vai tomar remedio ou placebo, sao escolhidas de forma randomica, muito dificil pensar em algo nesse estilo no nosso trabalho,a nao ser que crie uma pesquisa falsa fazendo diferentes pessoas testarem o leite de forma randomica e dizer qual dos dois a pessoa prefere, ai nesse caso daria pra aplicar o conceito de randomizacao, caso nao queira fazer isso, eh importante explicar que nao ha randomizacao no seu caso, pois sao dados coletados especificos 

5 -Stratification (blocking)  A block is a subset of the experimental units, which are believed to be similar in responsiveness, but which may differ in responsiveness from the units in another block, unica possibilidade de usar seria dizer que o blocking eh na pesquisa que voce conduziu com as pessoas testando sabor de leite, nao daria pra fazer toda a pesquisa em apenas um dia e entao voce teve que fazer em dias diferentes, blocking eh entendido como fazer em blocos, ou seja palavra dividir eh importante para facilitar o entendimento
CUIDADO PARA NAO CONFUNDIR COM RANDOM

6- factorial experiments

UMA BOA TABELA NAO MOSTRA MUITAS CASAS DECIMAIS:
EH MELHOR MEAN = 11.2 DO QUE MEAN= 11.2965

Hypothesis testing is a statistical analysis that uses sample data to assess two mutually exclusive theories about the properties of a population.
Statisticians call these theories the null hypothesis and the alternative hypothesis.
When you can reject the null hypothesis, the results are statistically significant (p value < 0.05), and your data support the theory that an effect exists at the population level.
In testing, you use significance levels and p-values to determine whether the test results are statistically significant.

Hypothesis testing is a form of inferential statistics that allows us to draw conclusions about an entire population based on a representative sample. We need to use a hypothesis test to determine the likelihood of obtaining our sample mean if the population mean is 260.
Descriptive Statistics Alone Won’t Answer the Question

Sampling distributions allow you to determine the likelihood of obtaining your sample statistic

We’ll graph the sampling distribution based on the assumption that the meanfuelcost for the entire population has not changed and is still 260 (null hypothesis)

We use the null hypothesis value as the basis of comparison for our observed sample value.

The hypothesis testing procedure quantifies the unusualness of our sample with a probability and then compares it to an evidentiary standard.
Significance levels and p-values allow us to test these two hypotheses:

Null hypothesis: The population mean equals the null hypothesis mean (260).

Alternative hypothesis: The population mean does not equal the null hypothesis mean (260).

por exemplo podemos pegar um ano especifico (2000) usar ele como null hypothesis e outro ano (2023) como nossa alternativa hypothesis

We’ll graph the sampling distribution based on the assumption that the milk consumption for the entire population has not changed and is still same value as in 2000 (null hypothesis)
We use the null hypothesis value as the basis of comparison for our observed sample value.
Alternative hypothesis: The consumption is not equal the null hypothesis mean .

Type I error: The rejects a null hypothesis that is true. You can think of this as a false positive.
Type II error: The test fails to reject a null hypothesis that is false. You can think of this as a false negative.

we can estimate the sample distribution using t distribution

Significance Level (Alpha)
It specifies how strongly the sample evidence must contradict the null hypothesis before you can reject the null for the entire population.

Lower significance levels also reduce the power of a hypothesis test to detect a difference that does exist.

a significance level of 0.05 signifies a 5% risk of deciding that an effect exists when it does not exist.

Use p-values and significance levels together to help you determine which hypothesis the data support.

the Significance Level defines how far the sample value must be from the know value before we can reject the null hypothesis

P-values 
It specifies how strongly the sample evidence must contradict the null hypothesis before you can reject the null for the entire population.
For instance, a significance level of 0.05 signifies a 5% risk of deciding that an effect exists when it does not exist.

The effect is the distance between the sample value and null value:
330.6 –260 = 70.6
Region: 260 +/-70.6
The total probability of the two shaded regions is 0.03112 
cada lado do grafico fica com metade entao 0.01556

If your P value is less than or equal to your alpha level, reject the null hypothesis.

Confidence Level

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/0271531795020438

one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) is used to determine whether there are any statistically significant differences between the means of three or more independent (unrelated) groups.
ANOVA determines whether three or more populations are statistically different from each other
the samples are independent of each other

have (approximately) normal distributions or when the sample number is high (e.g., > 30 per group).

More samples are better, but the tests can be performed with as little as 3 samples per condition.
A company tests a new marketing campaign in three different regions (East, West, and South). They measure the average monthly sales in each region for the past year. One-way ANOVA would assess if there's a significant difference in average sales between the three regions.

AULA 4

The null hypothesis (H0) states that the factor has no effect on the response. This is equivalent to saying that the population means are equal for all the factor levels. According to the null hypothesis, there is only random variation present.
If the null hypothesis is correct, every α = 0. In our example , it means does not matter who kicks the ball > no change

The alternative hypothesis (H1) states that the factor does have an effect on the response. If this is so, then some of the variation in the response is explained by the factor
The alternative hypothesis (H1) states that the factor does have an effect on the response. If this is so, then some of the variation in the response is explained by the factor.

The t-test is a method that determines whether two populations are statistically different from each other, whereas ANOVA determines whether three or more populations are statistically different from each other
These tests are performed when:
the samples are independent of each other
have (approximately) normal distributions or when the sample number is high (e.g., > 30 per group).
More samples are better, but the tests can be performed with as little as 3 samples per condition.

How interpret and understand ANOVA:
Step 1
We look at the error variance first, i.e. how different are the distances when the player is not changed? The three sample
variances 2.502 ,2.2172 ,2.9862 attempt to answer this question. Each of these variances is an estimate of the error variance, so it
makes sense to combine them into a single ‘pooled’ estimate, by averaging them. The pooled estimate is (2.502 + 2.2172
+ 2.9862) / 3 = 6.69, symbol 𝑺𝒘 𝟐
. This is the pooled within-samples variance, also called the error variance.
Each of the individual estimates is based on 4-1 degrees of freedom, so the pooled estimate has 3(4-1) = 9 degrees of freedom.

Step 2 Next we look at variation due to the factor, i.e. how different are the distances when the players are changed? We can
estimate this by calculating the variance between the sample means above. This between-samples variance is denoted by 𝑺𝒃 𝟐
.
It is based on 3-1 = 2 degrees of freedom. 𝑺𝒃 𝟐
= 2.8432 = 8.083. This figure needs to be adjusted because it is a variance of
sample means, not a variance of individual values. Individual values vary more than sample means, by a factor n, where n is
the sample size. Therefore, we multiply 𝑺𝒃 𝟐
by 4, in order to estimate the variance between individual distances for different
players. We require n × 𝑺𝒃 𝟐
= 4 × 8.083 = 32.33

Step 3 Remember that the question of interest is: does the factor have an effect on the response? Maybe not. Perhaps the
apparent variation due to the factor is just more random variation. We can test this hypothesis by comparing the variance due
to the factor with the variance due to error. To see if it is significantly bigger, we compute the variance ratio, F, which is named
after Sir Ronald Fisher who developed ANOVA.
F = variation between sample means / variation within the samples
In this case F = 32.33 / 6.69 = 4.83.

Step 4 Finally, we consider whether the calculated value of F is so unusual that it could not have occurred by chance. From the tables of the F distribution, we see that the critical value of F, at the 5% level, having 2 and 9 degrees of freedom, is 4.256. The calculated value of F exceeds this value, and therefore its p-value is less than 5%. We reject the null hypothesis, which states that the player has no effect on the distance

We say that the result is significant, i.e. the disagreement between the data and the null hypothesis is unlikely to have occurred by chance.

The data assert, at the 5% level, that player does affect distance. Jessy kicks the ball further than the other players.

Interpretando resultados anova:

Factor information:
factor being considered ( Player)
Level ( how many options = 3)
Values (name of each player)

Analysis of Variance:
Source
DF degree of freedom
Adj Ss adjusted sum of squares
adj MS adjusted mean square deviation
F Value variance ratio
P Value he probability of obtaining the data if the factor has no effect on the response

WHAT IS IMPORTNAT ABOUT ALL IT? P-Value
The p-value is less than 5%, showing that the data were unlikely to arise on the basis of the assumption that player has no effect on distance. We therefore reject this null hypothesis in favour of the alternative: player does have an effect on distance

less or equal 5% we reject null hypothesis
more than 5% we accept null hypothesis

once you have it you can conclude your experiment

ON MINITAB:
NO DELA TEM DUAS COLUNAS, UMA PRA JOGADOR E UMA PRA DISTANCIA (NA DE JOGADORES SAO APENAS 3 OPCOES)
StatS
ANOVA ONE-WAY
RESPONSE : DISTANCE
FACTOR: PLAYER

GRAPHS: 4 IN ONE
OK

Nos resultados que irao aparecer, nao eh mandatorio, porem seria interessante tambem interpretar r square
how much of the variation proportion of the response can be explained by the factor (normalment 80-90% sao bons valores)
se r square for baixo uma possivel explicacao eh:
- all players have similar conditions (is an assumption)
- the sample size is not good enough (that is a good answer to use)

normal probability in her example is good because all dots are close and aligned with the red line

versus fit, should have an equal distribution between the dots on the top of 0 and below 0

histogram: in that scenario is
skewed to the rigth, and the reason could be not enough data

versus order is good to not have a trend, for example all dots ar going up or something like that, if they go up down up down, is good



ANOVA assumptions
1.The errors are independent
2.The errors are normally distributed
3.The errors have a uniform variance


2 FACTOR EXPERIMENT (NOSSO CASO POR EXEMPLO)
The effect of two factors on a response, e.g. the effect of driver and vehicle on fuel economy. There are two drivers (Jeremy and Ralph) and three vehicles (hatchback, saloon and SUV). Fuel economy is measured in litres/100 km.
We can determine if driver has an effect on fuel economy, and if vehicle has an effect on fuel economy.

It is convenient to think about the experiment by using a table, in which the rows represent the levels of one factor, the columns represent the levels of the other factor, and each cell represents a particular factor-level combination. It does not matter which factor goes in the rows, and which factor goes in the columns.

This is referred to as a crossed design because every row crosses every column, showing that every level of one factor is combined with every level of the other factor, i.e. every driver drives every vehicle.
The data must be presented to the software in a proper structure, with a column for every variable, and a row for every
OU SEJA UMA TABELA EH A QUE USA NO MINITAB A AOUTRA EH PRA APRESENTAR EM FORMA SUMARIZADA E MELHOR/FACIL INTERPRETACAO

QUANDO ROLAR O ANOVA IRAO APARECE 2 FACTOR INFORMATION E 2 PRO AMNALYSIS VARIANCE, SE ANALISA UM POR UM

FOR DRIVER THE P VALUE IS HIGH (0.78 THAT MEANS DRIVER HAS NO IMPACT ON FUEL, WE ACCEPT THE NULL HYPOTHESIS) BE VERY CAREFUL HOW WRITE THE HYPOTHESIS

FOR VEHICLE THE P VALUE IS LOW (0.04 THAT MEANS VEHICLE HAS IMPACT ON FUEL, WE REJECT THE NULL HYPOTHESIS) BE VERY CAREFUL HOW WRITE THE HYPOTHESIS

QUANDO SAO 2 FATORES MINITAB:
StatS
ANOVA
GENERAL LINEAR model
FIT GENERAL LINEAR mode
RESPONSE: FUEL economy
FACTORS: DRIVER / VEHICLE
GRAPHS 4 IN ONE

LEMBRETE COMO TEM DOIS FATORES PRECISAMOS VER O R SQUARE ADJUSTED

NO EXEMPLO DELA POR TER UM ESPACO VAZIO NO MEIO DO HISTOGRAM, EH BOM DIZER QUE EH DIFICIL DE INTERPRETYAR POR FALTA DE MAIS DADOS, UMA VEZ QUE PELO VAZIO ENTRE OS ESPACOS VOCE PODE TER QUE FAZER ASSUMPTIUONS, SE SERA BIMODAL OU BELL curve

VERSUS ORDER IS HAPPENING SOMETHING, BECAUSE DATA IS NOT VERY RANDOM, SO A GOOD APPROACH WOULD BE GETTING MORE DATA
Two-factor experiments have advantages over single-factor experiments: they are more economical, and interactions can be discovered.

Crossed Factors:
➢
Each category of one factor occurs with every category of another.
➢
Allows calculation of interactions between factors.

AULA 5
statistical process control

 SPC statistical process control is a method of quality control which employs statistical methods to monitor and control a process
 -two sources of process variation:
 - uncontrolled (or assugnable)
 - chance variation (inherit in process)

 the goal of SPC is redution or elimination of variability in the process by identification of assignable causes
  * typical control chart has limits, nearly all points lie between the upper and lower control
  * there is also a warning limits, typically set at 2 standard deviations from the mean, that is good because increase the sensitivity of the control chart, but also increase the risk of false alarm

 * out of control: at least 1 point plots beyond the control limit, then the processi is out of control
  - if the points behave in systematic or nonrandom manner process could be out of control
 - pattern one : shift
 - patter two: trend
 - pattern three: point oustide control limits

 *important uses of control chart:
 -most processes do not operate in a state of statistical control
 - if causes can be eliminated from the process, variability will be reduced and the process will be improved
 - control chart ONLY detects assignable causes ( manager action will eliminate it)
 - process improvement cycle

 * Different types of control chart:
 - Variable charts (continuous numerical data) [time, distance, weigth]

 -attributes chart (categorical or discrete numerical data) [good/ bad, percentage of defects]

*control chart:
-sample size to be selected and frequency of selection must be specified
-larger samples easier to detect small shifts in process
- average run length (ARL): THE RESULT OF THAT CALCULATION WILL INDICATE TO USE THAT A OUT-OF-CONTROL SIGNAL WILL BE GENERATED EVEREY (ARL result) samples

*normality
*stability
*centrality
*capability
*performance

-IF THE OVERALL STANDARD DEVIATION EXCEEDS WITHIN STANDARD DEVIATION BY MORE THAN 10%, PROCESS IS NOT STABLE

we select that to measured because measurements are made on process rather than the product
the target duration of collect data of a clients is 10 minutes:
the LSL and USL are (7) and  (13) respectively
120 clients were timed on 2 days.
control limit are shown on graph (they are not specification limits, hey represent values unlikely to be violated as long as the process remains in control)
NOSSO CASO PARECE QUE XBAR-S chart parece ser o mais apropriado por ser continuous data (time) e subgroup size > 10

comment on: [IDEAL COPIAR IDEIA DO SLIDE DELA]
*normality
look the shape of the data, looks like a bell curve? that show normal distribution

*stability
check the data STDev (Overall) and STDev (Within) if lies on 10% to say if it is out of control or not (if not is stable)

*centrality
check if the target is close to the mean, so the process appears to be central

*capability
we look at cp and cpk
minimum acceptable value for procss capability is 1.33 ( to be deemed capable)
a value of 2 or greater is considered ideal
cpk also have a value of 1.33 minimum

*performance
we look at pp ppk
same rules from capability applies

common cause lies on 6 M's 
Men interviewerr not properly trained
Material the flyer information is not very easy to understand
Machine poroblem on ipad to collect data
Methoids perguntas feitas de forma na qual o entrecistado nseja claro para entender / language barrier
Mileu (environment) raining day
Measuremten problem with the cronometer not being able to measure it probably
GIVE POSSIBLE REASON FOR EACH ONE OF IT, BEING VERY SPECIFIC IF POSSIBLE





Claro! Estatística inferencial é uma parte da estatística que nos ajuda a tirar conclusões sobre uma população com base em uma amostra de dados. Em vez de analisar todos os dados possíveis, usamos uma parte deles para fazer previsões ou inferências.

Por exemplo, imagine que você quer saber a altura média dos estudantes de uma escola. Em vez de medir todos os estudantes, você mede apenas alguns e usa esses dados para estimar a altura média de todos os estudantes.

A estatística inferencial usa métodos como testes de hipóteses e intervalos de confiança para garantir que essas conclusões sejam confiáveis.

PODE USAR ESSES TERMOS NO TRABALHO
Independent variables are variables that are manipulated or are changed by researchers and whose effects are measured and compared (can also be called factor)
The dependent variables refer to that type of variable that measures the affect of the independent variable(s) on the test units.  (response variable)
SPC: watch the process and wait for info to lead to change

If we wants to estimate milk consumption, then the factors such as type of milk and year are independent variables, while the  milk consumption is highly dependent on such factors. Therefore, they are designated as the  dependent variable or respnse variable.

Factors are the variables that experimenters control during an experiment in order to determine their effect on the response variable, only use a limited number of values